an OZET piece
by Aaron Meicht & Scott Blumenthal

Oort
OR
Why Pigs?


SECTION 1

On stage, five MUSICIANS and four ACTORS.  

Two GUITARS, two HORNS, and PERCUSSION.

An OLDER MAN, a WOMAN, and a couple, COUPLE MAN and COUPLE WOMAN.

It is night, not long before dawn, on the road at the entrance to Village 4.  The perimeter of the village is a stockaded fence.  

W, CM, and CW are asleep, under thick, wooly blankets.

OM is awake.  He is dressed in an elaborate costume.  He rubs white powder into his beard to make himself look as old as can be.  He is preparing the ritual instrument on which the song will be played: a combination film projector and analog synthesizer.  The film needs to be loaded, the synth cables patched, etc.  He practices on the keyboard with no sound coming from the machine.  He lays out some part of a reciprocal gift in an elaborate pattern on the ground.

The MUSICIANS play Section 1.


SECTION 2

OM continues preparing the instrument.

A sheep bleats. W wakes up.

NOTE:  There are many silences throughout the following, long and short.  Where they fall, and how the characters enter and leave those silences, is at the actors' discretion.

W: 	Is that them?

OM: 	No.  It's early.  They won't come early.

W:	I was confused.

OM:	They'll come around nine.  You can sleep.

W: 	I don't think I can.  Do we have to wait?  To start?

OM: 	For dawn?

W: 	Yes.

OM: 	No.

W:	Maybe we should start then.

OM:	Not yet.

Indicates the sleeping CM

He'll get in my way.
He'll want to rewire everything, say
I threaded the film wrong.
He's ambitious.

W:	He has to be, doesn't he?  In his position.

OM:	They chose to be together.  You, me: chose different.  We don't have to compromise. 

OM:	Besides, I'm still Teacher.

W:	I know.

W:	They'll come this time?

OM:	Have to.  If they don't they are trash,
In front of everyone.  But they promised to my face.  They needed  three more months to gather everything.  

W:	A long time.

OM:	We waited longer for Village 12.

W:	I remember

OM:	You're impatient.

W:	I know.

It's the quiet.

OM:	We gave them 30 bushels of beets, and did without for a whole year.
14 bushels of onions
20 jugs of plum brandy
5 sheep
a mule
a guitar
blue chamomile – 12 bundles, big ones

It used to grow with the onions.

And then, also
well

took them three years to pay back the gift.

W:	I remember.

OM:	A humiliation. But in the end they did pay.
I'm looking forward to the groats.  And the whisky, of course.
You?

W:	The groats.

OM:	But they can't leave before dawn.  Too dangerous now to carry gifts
on the road at night.

I don't trust Anzori.
But I trust Bakhar.  He'll be Teacher next.   He'll
make sure they keep their promise.

W:	Did you ever see bandits?

OM:	On the road?

W:	Yes.

OM:	We travel during the day.

W:	Someone should catch them.

I haven't been to Village 20 in seven years.  Has it changed much?

OM:	Not that much.  Same as everywhere.  Fewer animals, fewer cousins, fewer crops.  Not so much of their famous abundance anymore. They're still lazy though.  They won't change with the times.

W:	Did they seem happy?

OM:	Happy?

What, all of them?

W:	Maybe the children?

OM:	I wouldn't say so.  Not much to look forward to, is there?

W:	Well we don't really know how long

OM:	But soon we will have sacks and sacks of buckwheat.  Radishes.  They may even bring a goat.
There is often a surprise.
Think about that: twice the milk.

Then they can be proud, Village 20.

W:	Content.

OM:	Free

W:	of their obligation.

OM:	That too.  But I mean

When they've done what was hard, and right.

W:	How many will come?

OM:	Couldn't say.

	CW wakes up.

CW:	Is it time?

W:	Not yet.

CW:	Close enough.  Did you make the porridge?

W:	No.  

OM:	She's helping me.

CW:	Obviously.
I'll do it.

She goes to wake CM.

OM:	Wake him when you're done.

CW:	We need water.  I have to start the fire.
Do you want to get it?

	She wakes up CM.

CM:	Is it time?

CW:	We need water.

CM:	Is everything ready?

OM:	We don't have porridge yet.

CW:	I'm making the fire.

CM:	We should start, I think.

OM:	We eat, then we start.

CM:	There's not enough time.

OM:	Of course there is.

W:	We should eat.  It will be a long time before they come.

CW:	You'll get hungry.

CM:	I'm alone in this.  Where's the pot?

CW:	Take the bucket.

CM:	There's some left.

	He goes.

CW piles charcoal in a primitive rocket-style stove and lights it.

Eventually, CM returns with a full bucket of water.

CW:	Thank you.

W:	Thank you.

	CW walks over and examines the instrument.

Near OM's personal belongings there is a book.  He picks it up.  He sits down by CW, who is still making porridge.

CM:	The god said do you have a good reason to be angry about the gourd?
Jonah said, I am very angry.  I am angry even to death.

Said that right to the god.
Was this from

OM:	Village 3.

CW:	Really?

W:	What is a gourd?

CM:	It's like a pumpkin.

OM:	Large enough to take shelter beneath.

W:	Really?

OM:	That's how it's described.

W:	They couldn't have been common.

CM:	The god caused this one to grow up, to comfort Jonah.
Then the god said to him, you pitied the gourd which you did not work to grow, which came up in a night and died in a night.

CW:	Angry to death.

CM:	… even to death.

OM:	They also gave us a wagon.

CW:	Yes.  There was that, at least.

W:	We were talking

I wondered how many more generations
do you think
one could hope for?

CW:	Two.

CM:	Probably two.  I don't have a radical opinion.
Have you turned that on?

OM:	It works.

CM:	It lights?

OM:	Yes.

W:	And we'll never know more than we do right now.

CW:	About what?

W:	Anything.

CW:	I suppose not.

W:	I wish they'd come.

CM:	Turn it on.
To let it warm up.

OM:	We'll hear them first.  We'll hear them approaching, but
they will also come striking the chimes.




[...]

W dresses.

W has participated in the exchange before, of course.  She has never kept the vigil.  She has not visited another village in years.  The last village she visited, Village 7, is only 30 minutes away.

The exchange has been a fact of life for at least three generations.

W finds a book OM is reading.  They talk about the book, which is text from earth.  ("It is from earth, too.")  OM is preoccupied though, expectant, nervous.

They discuss the exchange, and what OM is expecting to receive.  They talk about Village 20.  He doesn't trust them; he's expecting to be cheated in some way.

CM wakes up, trades words with OM and W, and goes back to sleep.

OM and W talk about the couple.

There are silences.

The visitors from Village Twenty will not arrive for at least three hours after dawn because they can't set off (from where?  would they have stopped in another village on the way?) until light.  The roads are dangerous at night.  There are, OM and W think, bandits.

CW wakes up.  She asks W if she has made tea or porridge.  W has not, obviously.  CW boils water.  She makes porridge.

W expects to see her daughter, who was raised in Village 20, and who is old enough, finally, to participate in the exchange (and a year later, to return to Village 4).

The porridge is ready and CW wakes up CM and gives everyone porridge.  They eat quickly. They finish dressing. They begin the song.

SECTION 3

MUSICIANS start playing Section 3 (a singularity).

OM finishes preparing for the welcome song.  He switches on the projector.

The Earth Music (a linearity) that accompanies the film is clearer than the images.  The images fall, perhaps as an afterthought, on the posts of the fence.  

The film shows flightless songbirds against a flat background, completely outside their habitats or any context.  The birds are moving, but they are not singing, they are not eating, they are not doing anything that gives clues to what they are or what they are like.

The music is old and alien.  It is played on strings.

The ACTORS play four OZET Songs (different linearities) with the music of the film that complement it, expand it, claim it as their own.  There are words to their songs; the song of the film is instrumental only.  The instrument has a metronome, with programs for each different song.  The subject of each song is distinct:

(Prime 3 Song • q=135) - The unique heritage of Village 4
(Prime 5 Song • q=225) - How happy the villagers will be when they receive their gift
(Prime 7 Song • q=157.5) - The alliance between Village 4 and Village 20
(Prime 2 Song • q=90) - Earth

When the characters sing, they may cover their mouths in some ritual manner. 

Prime 3 Song • q=135
The unique heritage of Village 4

The shore
And the field

Black
Sea

Blood red plums

To cultivate the oldest memories
Takes a lot of patience
Faith in the harvest yet to come

The tree
In the old square

offers plums
every year.

Prime 5 Song • q=225
How happy the villagers will be when they receive their gift


Here in my mind
I see you on the road
at dawn and the dust is like a bridge
that you build
as you walk
and you wear
orange wool
yellow leaves
on your coat like a waxwing's breast.

See the chest on it's bier;
locust thorns underneath
guard the gift that you bring us.
We are happy.


Prime 7 Song • q=157.5
The alliance between Village 4 and Village 20

When I would do
Without
Will you
Offer to
Open your storehouse
Door to me?

Will you
Welcome too

All our daughters
All of our sons

What about the cousin
Out on her own
hungry?

When I would do
Without
Will you
Offer to
Open your storehouse
Door to me?

Will you
Welcome me?


Prime 2 Song • q=90
Earth

Search for a seed
swaddled
asleep
silent in the field

burrow

and ask it
for

something
that we could know.

From what we know:

Stork Feather
(Gone)
Star Aster
(Gone)
Stork Feather
(Gone)
Forever
(Gone)



A YOUNG WOMAN and a YOUNG MAN arrive on the road, on the far side of the fence, as the others play.

The ACTORS stop playing.  OM turns off the instrument.

The MUSICIANS play for a few moments more, and then stop.

SECTION 4

YW and YM ask permission to come into the village.

[...]

OM:	Are you…?  You aren't our guests.

YW:	No.

OM:	Who are you then?

YW: 	____ _____.  From Lazarevo.

OM:	Lazarevo?

YM:	Village 17.

OM:	What's Lazarevo, then?

YM:	That was its founding name.

OM:	Says who?  There's no founding names.

W:	Is it just the two of you?

YW:	And two more.  Waiting down the road.

[...]

YW and YM want to tell the other villagers that they are going to the city, and invite any who want to come.

There are already other pioneers there, from at least four villages.   By the time they arrive themselves there will almost certainly be "pilgrims" from several more.

What will they do there? asks CM.  Start over, says YW. or, the reason that they are going to the City is that they have heard that people in the City have received a transmission from the Earth. 

You'll have no food there.  No water, they say.

Water still flows into the cisterns outside the city.  We'll draw it from there at first, says the YW.

You have to go, says OM.  We are waiting for our guests from Village 20.

YM and YW tell the others that they passed through Village 20 and they will not be coming.

OM refuses to let them stay until the rest wake up, he demands that they leave.  There is no starting over.  ("We are now part of the scattered disc.")

They exhort W, CM, and CW to at least pass word on to the rest of the village.  CW and CM do not agree.  W says she will tell the others, in defiance of OM.  

YM and YW leave the way they came.  

OM warns W not to say anything.  W responds that she said what she did to make them go.  And they left, didn't they?

W asks, will they resume the song?  CM says no: Village 20 won't come.  CW says they might be coming after all.  It's too early to know.  They may have changed their minds.  Start the song again, she says.  When the others wake up, they will be expecting the four to be playing.  If they aren't, they will have to explain what happened.

CM refuses.  Stay and play the song, he says.  He'll wait until it's clear they aren't coming, and then he will gather a delegation to travel to Village 20 and confront them.  CM leaves, returning to the village.

CW could say that she doesn't get the gift shit. She doesn't see the need for the other villages anymore.  "We are fine to live out our days like this and enter the Scattered Disc."

Play, says CW.  OM says he needs a minute to think.  He sits against the instrument.  CW and W wait.  OM falls asleep.  CW goes to wake him up.  W tells her to give him a minute.  They wait.

SECTION 5

The MUSICIANS play Section 5.

W and CW wait.

After several minutes, W stands, climbs over the fence and leaves in the direction YW and YM went.

CW watches her go.

CW waits and watches OM.  
